# ssk
To SQL and Codd's RDM, that are like galaxies on opposite ends of the universe, SubSet Keys (SSKs) would live in the subspace by which they're one.

It is common knowledge that Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMSs), a.k.a. Relational Databases, work on the fundamental principle where a relationship any relationship (one-to-one, one-to-many, and even the many-to-many workaround involving an associative table to be added) works on one single principle - records of the "many" side stores the key to the "one" side as an attribute. Simple and effective, easy to understand, once you get that pattern embedded into your thinking, that is.

Most also know that Relational Databases was born out of mathematical set theory in the '70 by a man named Edward F. Codd, by what is caleld the Relational Data Model (RDM)

Yet almost nobody appreciates that the RDM's mathematical basis is entirely ambivalent about whether at the data level you store a parent key for each child or a set of children for each parent. To the maths, and as we will soon discoverk, in practice, there is no differene between the two. Yes, the one is 50 years ahead in development, but the original implementers could have chosen eiher mechanism, and then developments on the other would have been 50 years ahread.

The two alternatives may be mathematically each othes equals, and technically the prevailing approach today has the overwhelming advantage, but in terms of the value it is able to deliver to data users, owners and investors, the situation is reversed. 

That's because when the SQL language was being formulated, its formulators made a tiny but important, likely inadvertent, probably well-meaning, omission from its semantics. To represent the notion of a set, as required by the set theory roots, they represented sets as concrete things - tables, queries, views, anything that can be SELECTed from, even composites of those as the result of UNIONs, INTERSECT and MINUS. But that's it. They defined the identity of a row or (or tuple as RDM had it), made a whole song and dance about it, but they never bothered to define what a set, or a subset's ID would be, beyond that table or view name and the name given in the SELECT statement as an alias. You could store a tuple's ID in a value or set of values, that was the whole point, but the identity of a subset of rows was considered out of bounds.

Ironically, they key to choosing the alternative representation was already written down and proven by the the the SQL team had to make their choice, but to be fair, it was only publioshed a few short years before the project started and Donald Knuths seminal work The Art Of Programming which contained the solution was not yet seen as seminal and a source of anything of practical use. Plus, even thou Knuth did spell out the principle, his own alalysis of its applicabilty would have excluded from consideration in any case. 

For the less-informed, I'm referring of course to the linked concepts of sets as described by Knuth, and the concept of bit vectors as a way to represent sets. The caveat being listed as though bit-vectors are ideal for representing sets, they register size of a processor renders their applicable domain to no more than the bit-size of the computer. Large and/or sparse sets were seen as placing impractical space demands on the processors of the day. 

Lunky for me, I know nothing about the limitations Knuth placed on bit-vectors representing sets, or even that the made such connection. So when I was faced with a burning need to deal with many-to-many data in a much, much more effective manner, I wasn't being help back by the prosumed impossibilities the old masters attached to the problem I needed solving. I did't know I was proing anyone wrong when I evolved a solution making full advantage of what i knew about my specific datasets and eventually of all such datasets in general. They say many things are impossible only until you've done it, but by my own experience, it's even better when you have no inkling about the theoretical impossibility you're facing. 

So I cam up wih a way to build an indexable variable length byte array which is a canonical representation of any specific subset of a particular table, and called that value a SubSet Key. It is, at a logical level one gigantic logical bit vector, squashed opportunistically into a very small series of bytes.

Having spent a large portion of my life designing and building innovative databases, I know a thing or two about how (and why) to avoid many-to-many relatinships. Among other thinsgs, the are an absolute pain to present to users in a sensible manner, but an even bigger pain to try and make analytical sense of. Sufficient domain knowledge had always been to turning associative ables inoto real tables that serve a business purposes, and using those to ease all those pains. Yet I found myself faced with a situation where didn't merely lack the domain knowledge to follow the established pattern, such domain knowledge could not be determined beforehand. 

A real impasse, but i got creative and found a way to get the job done. But it left me somewhat apprehensive about what the cost would be. I assumed there would be a substantial price to pay for the enormous analutical benefits my soltuion brought with it, so I had to do the sums to deermine if I can afford it. 

What I found left was unfathomable, left me speachless and reeling, forcing me to go back time after time to check my facts and consult with others to check my math. Turns out, if you take a standard associatie table, the space it requires exceeds the space you'd need to store the same information in SSKs in the worst case, by a factor close to 8. That's right. SSKs take up, at worst, around 1/8th of the space FKR (Foreigh Key Referencing) takes. I was prepared to live with it if the ration was 2:8 the other way round, to this was a bonus of epic proportions. 


